# WILSON'S DISEASE

## Introduction
Excess accumulation of copper in the body which can lead to oxidative damage to the organs is called Wilson's disease.

## Copper metabolism:
* Daily intake of copper with food is a to 5 mg.
* The RDA is 0.9 mg.
* 15 to 20% is absorbed and the rest is excreted unchanged in stools.
* Site of absorption is duodenum and proximal jejunum.
* The transporter is copper transport receptor-1 (CTR1).
* Copper in enterocytes is absorbed → Binds with albumin, histidine and alpha a macroglobulin → Enters the liver.
* It is filtered in urine, but completely reabsorbed in the kidney → Hence there is no urinary excretion.
* Excretion is by hepatobiliary circulation.
* No enterohepatic circulation since copper can be absorbed from daily food
* menke's disease (x linked): Copper is not absorbed leading to deficiency.

## Functions of copper:
Enzymes requiring copper:
* Connective tissue and elastin cross linking: Lysyl oxidase.
* Free radical scavenging: Superoxide dismutase (SOD)
* Electron transport chain: Cytochrome C oxidase (Type 4).
* Pigment production: Tyrosinase.
* Neuro transmission: Dopamine β mono oxygenase.
molecular copper is never free → Neutralized by metallochaperones/metallothioneins/glutathione in liver.

## Ceruloplasmin:
* This is an α a-glycoprotein.
* It can bind upto 6 molecules of copper.
* Apoceruloplasmin + copper → Holoceruloplasmin (Ceruplolasmin) → This process requires an enzyme called p-ATPase or wilson's ATPase.

## Deficiency in wilson's ATPase causes wilson's disease.
* The gene which produces Wilson's ATPase is present in chromosome 13.
* Ceruloplasmin is also increased in inflammation, pregnancy, estrogen excess.
* Holoceruloplasmin contains ferroxidase which converts ferritin to transferrin for mobilization of iron.

## Pathway inside hepatocyte:
Once the copper enters the liver it is absorbed by CTR1 → Transported into hepatocyte by CCS, COXI and ATOXI.
The main enzyme involved is ATOXI which transports copper to ATP7B/wilson's ATPase.

## Funtions of ATP7B:
* Sensing intracellular copper.
* Conversion of apoceruloplasmin to holoceruloplasmin.
* Biliary excretion.

## Molecular pathogenesis
### ATP7B gene:
* The gene involved is ATP 7B gene and the product is ATP7B/Wilson ATPase.
* It is a membrane bound copper-transporting Pi-type ATPase.
* It has 1443 amino acids and 6 metal binding domains in the amino terminal end.
* There are 8 transmembrane segments and a carboxy end.
* This gene is found in liver, Kidney, brain and placenta.
* mutation lead to retention of copper in the liver.
* most common mutation is H1069Q (West) and R778L (East).
* The half life of apoceruloplasmin is 1 day while that of ceruloplasmin is 5 to 6 days.

## Mutation:
* There are more than 600 mutations.
* most common happens in compound heterozygotes which are missense mutations.
* most common mutations histidine1069glutamine (H1069Q) mutation in the west and arginine 778leucine (R778L) in the east.

## Copper and toxicity:
* Copper is an oxidizing agent and is corrosive.
* All injuries are related to that.
* Apart from liver, it also damages blood and kidneys.
* RBC:
    * Decreases glutathione and G-6PD/glycolysis enzymes inhibition.
    * Induces methemoglobinemia.
* Kidney: RTA/ Heme injury.

## Histopathology:
* Steatosis, focal necrosis, glycogenated nuclei, apoptotic bodies can be seen.
* Periportal fibrosis which can lead to cirrhosis (macronodular).
* In early Wilson's HPE is normal because metallothionein which is induced makes the copper inert.
* Later copper is deposited in lysosomes which is stained by rubeanic acid and orcein.
* Can immitate autoimmune hepatitis (Interface hepatitis).
* ALF: Copper will be seen in Kupffer cells.
* Electron microscopy: Tennis racket cristae.

## Clinical features
Generally diagnosed from 6 to 40 years.
No symptoms will be seen in <3 years.
more commonly affects liver, CNS and blood.
Children present with neurological symptoms and adults with hepatic symptoms.
Liver:
* Generally seen in 3 to 50 years.
* Asymptomatic child: Hepatomegaly/transaminitis/steatosis (NAFLD/MASLD).
* Acute hepatitis: High bilirubin but not so high transaminases.
* Chronic hepatitis.

## Chronic liver disease:
* Compensated and decompensated.
* NAFLD.
* Gallstones.
* Autoimmune hepatitis mimicker:
    * Fatigue, malaise, arthropathy and rashes.
    * Increased Tranaminases/high IgGs.
    * ANA and ASMA positive.
* HCC and cholangiocarcinoma (Rare).
* Acute liver failure:
    * MODS: Coombs-negative HA and renal failure.
    * ALT/AST <1500 IU/L
    * Normal ALP.
    * TB/ALP <4.
    * AST/ALT >2.a.
* Ceruloplasmin maybe normal.
* Stopped the chelation therapy abruptly.
* Kupffer cell deposition.
* methanobactin → Bacterial peptide that binds copper avidly and improves mitochondrial activity.

## Neurological:
Later presentation.
movement disorders:
* Tremor or dystonia, loss of fine motor control.
* Wing beating tremor.
* Facial grimace known as the risus sardonicus.
Relative loss of movement:
* Parkinsonian rigidity.
* mask-like facies.

## Eye:
Kayser-Fleischer ring:
* Depostion of copper in descement's membrane of cornea.
* KF rings are usually bilateral.
* 99% neurological and 30 to 50% hepatic WD will have KF rings.
* Slit lamp examination is mandatory for diagnosis.
* Disappearance of KF rings will require adequate chelation and may take years.
* KF rings is not specific to wilson's disease → KF ring is also seen in primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis and familial cholestatic syndrome.
Note: Sunflower cataract: Normal vision.

## Blood:
Coomb's negative hemolytic anaemia due to direct action of copper in the blood.

## Kidney:
* Fanconi syndrome.
* Stones.

## Musculoskeletal:
* Osseomuscular specifically in India which includes:
    * Osteoporosis and osteochondritis dissecans.
    * Rhabdomyolysis.

## Others:
* Cardiomyopathy or cardiac arrhythmias.
* Hypoparathyroidism.
* Pancreatitis.

## Diagnosis
Diagnostic spectrum:
* Serum ceruloplasmin.
* Twenty four hour urinary copper assay.
* Kayser-Fleischer rings.
* Coombs-negative hemolytic anaemia.
* Liver biopsy and liver copper estimation.
* MRI brain.
* Family history.
* Genetic studies.
* Serum copper and d-pen challenge → Not used nowadays.

## Ceruloplasmin:
* Carrier protein from liver.
* Two methods: Enzymatic assays (Better) & immunologic assays (most used).
* Normal values range from 20 to 40 mg/dl.
* Decreased in CLD, malabsorption and nephrotic syndrome.

## Twenty four hour urinary copper assay:
* urine sample to be collected in a copper free container.
* Test should be done before chelators are started.
* Level >100 mcg/dl is diagnostic (Specific).
* Levels >40 mcg/dl is sensitive.

## Kayser-Fleischer rings:
* Sought in all suspected patients.
* Negative in asymptomatic siblings and <10 years of age.

## Coombs-negative hemolytic anaemia:
Hemolysis and a negative Coombs test in a patient with ALF is diagnostic.

## MRI brain:
* Tectal plate hyperintensity.
* CPM like abnormalities.
* Giant panda sign in the midbrain.

## Liver biopsy and liver copper estimation:
* HPE: Nonspecific.
* Biopsy should be at least 1 cm in length.
* mainly for liver copper estimation. Normal is <50 mcg/g of dry weight, in WD a level >250 mcg/g.
* Disadvantage → Sampling issue is present.

## D-pen challenge test:
* 500 mg is given qlah.
* 24 h urine copper >1600 mcg.
* Not very specific.

## Serum copper:
* Total copper: 90% ceruloplasmin bound and rest non CB.
* Normal Non CB copper is <15 mcg/dl.
* In wilson's disease it is >20 mcg/dl.

## Scoring system for diagnosis of WD (modified Leipzig score):
| Diagnostic criteria. | Score. |
|---|---|
| KF rings | |
| Present | 2 |
| Absent | 0 |
| Normal (720 mg/dl). | 0 |
| 1 to 20 mg/dl. | 2 |
| 6 to 10 mg/dl | 3 |
| <5 mg/dl | 3 |
| Urinary copper (In the absence of acute hepatitis): | |
| >100 mcg. | 2 |
| Normal or <100 mcg. | 0 |
| Coombs negative hemolytic anaemia (with liver disease): | |
| Present. | 1 |
| Absent. | 0 |
| mutational analysis: | |
| On both chromosomes detected | 4 |
| On one chromosome detected | 1 |
| No mutation detected/test not done. | 0 |
| Liver biopsy: | |
| Liver copper >250 mcg dry weight per gram | 3 |
| Liver copper <50 mcg in hepatic presentation. | -1 |
| Orcein or rhodamine positive granules. | 1 |
| Neurobehavioral symptoms suggestive of WD. | 1 |
| Typical MRI brain | 1 |
| Family h/o sibling death from suspected WD. | 1 |

Evaluation of scores:
* 24 or more → Diagnosis established
* 2 to 3 → Diagnosis possible, more tests needed.
* <2 → Diagnosis very unlikely.

## Treatment
Diet:
organ meat/shellfish/nuts/chocolates/mushroom should be avoided.
Two types of treatment: Chelators and Zinc.

## Chelators:
* D-penicillamine.
* Trientine.
* Tetrathiomolybdate.

## D-penicillamine:
* Dose is 1 to 15 g/day (Adults) or 20 mg/kg/day (Children).
* Inhibits the accumulation of copper in lysosomes.
* Solubilizes copper for mobilization leading to urinary excretion.
* No involvement with metallothioneins.
* may worsen neurological symptoms of wilson's which can be irreversible.
* Start low dose and build by a to 4 weeks.
* Acute adverse drug reaction: A febrile reaction with rash and proteinuria within 1 week.
* Skin: Rashes, pemphigus, and elastosis perforans.
* Hypothyroidism/pyridoxine deficiency.
* Pyridoxine supplement should be given.
* D-penicillamine should be stopped immediately if the patient develops:
    * SLE like syndrome.
    * Good pasture syndrome.
    * myasthenia gravis like syndrome.

## Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate:
* Still not available.
* Treatment of severe neurologic Wilson's disease.
* Not associated with early neurologic deterioration.

## Trientine:
* Dose is 1 to 1.5 g/day.
* Increases urinary copper excretion.
* Decreases intestinal absorption of copper.
* Neurological worsening may be seen but not as much in D-penicillamine.
* Not much adverse drug reactions.
* Gastritis/IDA can be seen.

## Zinc:
* Dose is 50 mg elemental zinc 3 times daily.
* Decreases absorption.
* Increases the excretion through stools.
* Induction of metallothionein in enterocytes.

## Enhance the availability of glutathione.
Gastritis is the common side effect.

## monitoring of treatment:
Interpretation of tests used in monitoring drug treatment of wilson's disease:

| | Zinc | D-penicillamine/trientine |
|---|---|---|
| Initial treatment. | u Cu 100 to 500 mcg/day <br> S free cu >as mcg/dl. <br> u 2n >2000 mcg/d. | u Cu >500 mcg/d <br> s free cu >as mcg/dl |
| Good control (maintenance). | u Cu <75 mcg/d <br> s free cu 10 to 15 mcg/dl. | u Cu 200 to 500 mcg/d <br> S free cu 10 to 15 mcg/dl. |
| Non-compliance/ Inadequate dose. | u zn <2000 mcg/d. <br> S free Cu >15 mcg/dl. | u Cu <200 mcg/d <br> u Cu >500 mcg/d <br> s free cu 15 mcg/dl |
| Overtreatment. | u Cu <25 mcg/d <br> s free Cu <5 mcg/dl. | u Cu <200 mcg/d <br> s free cu <5 mcg/dl. |

## Prognostic indices:
* Nazer prognostic index: Bilirubin/INR/AST→ Not used nowadays.
* New wilson index score: TB/INR/AST/TC and albumin → If the score is 211 → Transplantation is needed.

## Treatment of pregnant patients:
* Pregnancy in patients with WD is safe.
* Patients with previous pregnancies have better chances.
* D-pen is teratogenic → But people who have taken D-pen have also delivered normal kids.
* Treatment should be continued with previous chelation.
* If patient is on D-pen the dose should be decreased in third trimester because it decreases wound healing.
* In breastfeeding mothers zinc is fine but trientine and D-pen is transmitted in breast milk so avoid breast feeding in such cases.
* The risk of birth defects in WD is generally low.

## Other patients:
* LOLT from heterozygous is effective and safe for both donor and recipient.
* Liver transplantation is not indicated for in isolated severe neurological WD.
