# VASCULAR DISORDERS OF THE LIVER

## Important blood supply of liver:
* Portal vein.
* Hepatic vein.
* Hepatic artery.

**Note:** Liver has dual blood supply → Any obstruction in any vessel → Compensation of blood supply.
Hepatic vein can get obstructed silently, unlike portal vein.

## Budd chiari syndrome

**Features:**
* Obstruction of hepatic veins or terminal IVC.
* Types of BCS:
    i. Primary BCS: Problem is present within the blood vessel.
    ii. Secondary BCS: Problem is present outside the blood vessel.
* 2 major HV territory involvement is must to diagnose it as Budd chiari syndrome.
* IVC obstruction → Lumbar and azygous veins will give blood supply from below upwards → Engorged veins in the abdomen.
* Histology: Centrilobular area congestion with parenchymal extinction.

**Etiology:**
Causes of thrombosis:
* myeloproliferative disorders (40%): JAK mutation, polycythemia rubra vera.
* Protein C.
* Protein S.
* Antithrombin deficiency.
* Coagulation and fibrinolysis factors polymorphism.
* Homocystenemia / MTHFR polymorphism.
* Pregnancy.

---

## Vascular Disorders & Portal Hypertension

**Causes of secondary BCS:**
* Tumor or alveolar echinococcosis.
* Compression by cysts or FNH.
* Polycystic liver disease or liver abscesses.
* Blunt trauma.

**General causes of Budd chiari syndrome:**
**Hypercoagulable states:**
* Antiphospholipid syndrome.
* Antithrombin deficiency.
* Factor V Leiden mutation.
* methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism.
* myeloproliferative neoplasm.
* Oral contraceptives.
* Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
* Postpartum thrombocytopenic purpura.
* Pregnancy.
* Protein & deficiency.
* Protein S deficiency.
* Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A.
* Sickle cell disease.

**Infections:**
* Aspergillosis.
* Filariasis.
* Hydatid cysts (Echinococcus granulosus or E. multilocularis).
* Liver abscess (Amoebic or pyogenic).
* Pelvic cellulitis.
* Schistosomiasis.
* Syphilis.
* TB.

**Malignancies:**
* Adrenal carcinoma.
* HCC.
* Leiomyosarcoma.
* Leukemia.
* Lung cancer.
* Myxoma.
* Renal carcinoma.
* Rhabdomyosarcoma.

---

## miscellaneous

* Behcet disease.
* Celiac disease.
* Dacarbazine therapy.
* IBD.
* Laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
* membranous obstruction of the vena cava.
* Polycystic liver disease.
* Sarcoidosis.
* Trauma to abdomen or thorax.

## Clinical Features:
* Asymptomatic to ALF to chronic liver disease.
* Ascites/abdominal pain and fever.
* Elevated ALP.

## Investigations:
* Blood counts can be normal.
* Doppler US, CT, or MRI.
* **Doppler findings:**
    i. Lack of visibility.
    ii. Dilatation upstream obstruction of the terminal portion.  $\implies$ Acute BCS.
    iii. Diffuse narrowing and irregularity. $\implies$ Chronic BCS.
    iv. Transformation into a cord-like remnant.
* **Gross features:**
    * Liver sectorial atrophy and hypertrophy, including segment I enlargement → Caudate lobe hypertrophy.
    * Ascites, portosystemic collaterals, and enlargement of the spleen.
    * Hepatic angiogram shows spider web appearance.

**CT imaging:**
* Enhancement in the arterial and portal phases, which disappears at the late phase.
* Rare enhancement in the arterial phase with disappearance in the portal and late phases, without washout, corresponding to regenerative macronodules.

**Note:** In patients with normal blood count and chronic liver disease suspect Budd chiari syndrome.

---

## Differential diagnosis:
1. Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome.
2. constrictive.
3. CLD especially alcoholic hepatitis → Increased size of hepatocytes compress the surrounding veins.

**Note:** Biopsy is required to differentiate between HCC & regenerative nodules.

## Treatment:
* Anticoagulation.
* Angioplasty → web and stenting → Thrombus.
* TIPS/DIPS.
* Liver transplant.
* 2 weeks after adequate treatment if the patient develops the following then step up treatment is done :
    i. Ascites requiring paracentesis.
    ii. SOP.
    iii. AKI.
    iv. Variceal bleed /HE.
    v. AST/ALT > 300 IU/mL.
    vi. Clot extension.
    vii. New thrombotic episodes.
* OCPs are C/I
* Pregnancy is not a C/I: Good outcomes if survival after 20 weeks.
* Short-length stenosis: Angioplasty & stenting.

---

## Steps for diagnostic imaging:
* Doppler ultrasound.
* venography/ transvenous biopsy.

## Therapeutic steps:
* Anticoagulation/ medical therapy.
* Angioplasty/stent/ thrombolysis.
* TIPS/DIPS.
* Liver transplant.

## Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome

**Pathophysiology:**
* Normally, sinusoidal cells have fenestrations that allow only small required molecules to pass through.
* Damaging factor → Sinusoidal cells surrounding the lumen gets damaged → Sinusoidal cells become rounded → Space between the sinusoids increase → Blood flows into the lumen of space of disse → Inflammation → Sinusoidal and endothelial cells get detached and embolised → Sinusoidal cells are blocked by the emboli.

**Features:**
* LSECS destruction.
* Central areas.
* Obstruction of sinusoidal lumens.
* Drugs with toxicity to LSECS and 8m is seen in BMT conditioning like :
    * Chemoradiation for abdominal malignancy.
    * Oxaliplatin for CRC.
    * Glutathione.
    * Thiopurines.

---

## Also called as non thrombotic sinusoidal obstruction.
## Other causes:
* underlying liver disease.
* Hormones to prevent uterine bleeding.
* High-intensity regimens.
* Gemtuzumab ozogamicin.
* Around 20% of patients with BMT conditioning will develop sinusoidal obstruction syndrome.
* Acute, to subacute or chronic Ascites.
* Similar to BCS.
* Within the first 2 months of insult the obstruction happens.
* Liver biopsy: Gold Standard
* High HVPG: Sinusoidal.

## Histology:
* Sinusoidal dilatation and loss of hepatocytes → Characteristic.
* Rounding of the cells, subendothelial edema, hemorrhage & eccentric narrowing.
* Periportal area, portal tracts, and portal vessels : Normal.
* Centrilobular hemorrhagic necrosis.
* hemorrhage in hepatic veins.
* Loss of integrity of the hepatic vein endothelial lining.
* Sinusoidal and venular fibrosis.

## Clinical features:
* Right upper quadrant pain.
* Hepatomegaly.
* weight gain due to fluid accumulation.
* Hyperbilirubinemia.

## Severity of the disease:
* mild : Treatment is not necessary.
* moderate
* Severe  $\implies$ Treatment required.

## Differential diagnosis:
* Graft-versus-host disease.
* Drug-induced cholestasis.
* Sepsis-induced cholestatic jaundice.
* Viral or fungal liver infections.
* Parenteral nutrition.

---

## Grading of SOS:
* Grade 0 : Absent.
* Grade 1: mild - 4/3rd.
* Grade 2: moderate - <a/3rd.
* Grade 3: Severe - Complete centrilobular involvement.
* Based on the hemorrhage in the centrilobular area the grading is given.
* This grading is considered only for oxaliplatin induced SOS.

## Criteria:
**Seattle Criteria (Within 20 days):**
* Bilirubin >2 mg/dL.
* Hepatomegaly or pain of liver origin.
* >2% weight gain due to fluid retention.

**Baltimore Criteria:**
* Bilirubin >2.
* Tender hepatomegaly.
* >5% weight.

## Rule out other competing causes of fluid retention, cholestasis and hepatomegaly.

## Treatment:
* Avoid nephrotoxic hepatotoxic drugs.
* Discontinue Norethisterone.
* Delay in patients with active hepatitis.
* Spontaneous recovery is the norm 2-3 weeks.
* mortality d/t MODS.
* Assess :
    * Weight gain edema, ascites.
    * Hepatomegaly.
    * Jaundice.
* Defibrotide and TIPS.
* Liver transplant.

## Prophylaxis:
* ursodeoxycholic acid (13-15 mg/kg/day).
* Defibrotide : 25mg/kg.

---

## Congenital portosystemic shunts

**Features:**
* Communication between the PV and the systemic venous circulation.
* Abernethy malformation.
* 2 Types: Portal vein based.
    1: No PV (End to side shunt).
    2: PV present (Side to side shunt).
* Porto systemic shunting : HE /HPS /PAH.
* Portal blood deprivation : NRH/ Regenerative nodules/FNH.
* Abdominal imaging.
* Recurrent altered sensorium → NH3 and Brain imaging.
* Neonates → Galactosemia (Seen in type I).

**Type I CPSS:**
* Females.
* Cardiac (Situs inversus, CHD) and spleen issues (Polysplenia).
* Hypergalactosemia.
* Hyperbilirubinemia.
* Hyperammonemia
* FNH : la and I b.

| Type I CEPS | Type 2 CEPS |
|---|---|
| End-to-side anastomoses. | Side-to-side anastomoses. |
| Congenital absence of the PV. | PV supply is partially conserved. |
| usually occurs in girls. | No gender preference. |
| multiple associated malformations : Polysplenia, malrotation, congenital heart defects. | Fewer associated malformations. |

## Ischemic hepatitis

**Features:**
* Also known as hypoxic hepatitis.
* AST > 1000.
* It is seen in 70% of cardiac patients and 20 - 30% of lung patients.
* ALT/LDH ratio <1.5 : Ischemic hepatitis.
* The values come to normal with treatment after 2 - 3 weeks.

---

## HCC and PVT:
**Classification:**
* vpo: No thrombus
* vpi: Thrombus in the tiniest of lot.
* vpa: Thrombus in the right sectoral.
* vp3: Thrombus in the right portal vein.
* vp4: Thrombus in the main portal vein.

This classification of portal vein thrombosis is based on HCC.
